# Games and Roles

Versión en español: https://medium.com/@jx1200/juegos-y-roles-508f1adab42b 


There’s several ways to define a concept such as “game.” An academic definition would center on finding a series of necessary and jointly sufficient conditions, that is, a series of characteristics that must be in every game, and that, when put together, make something into a game. Those are, for example, the kind of definitions that talk about a game as a free, voluntary, and rules-based activity.

Other type of definitions aim rather to encapsulate a particular aspect of what a “game” is. We have, here, Sid Meier’s definition of a game as a “series of interesting decisions.” That’s the kind of definition we’re looking for here.

In his essay “Play, the Game, and the Generalized Other,”  american philosopher George Herbert Mead analyzes games from the point of view of their role in shaping the social “me,” our self-consciousness about our place in society. In order to do that, he distinguished between the concepts of “play” and “game.” “Play” is a free activity, associated with children, while a “game” has rules, and encompasses activities like sports or gambling.

For Mead, both concepts imply the adoption of roles. A role for Mead is a disposition that “call out that particular response or group of responses” when faced with certain stimuli. For example, in a game of hide-and-seek, there are two roles: “hunter” and “hunted,” and each of them must act in a particular way.

The difference between “play” and “game” is in how strict those roles are. In “play,” children occupy several roles (mother, teacher, policeman) without any underlying structure, switching between them freely. In “game,” however, the roles are clearly defined by rules. Thus, in a game, children must understand what’s expected of each role, and be able to adopt them indistinctly. As Mead writes, “In that early stage he passes from one role to another just as a whim takes him. But in a game where a number of individuals are involved, then the child taking one role must be ready to take the role of everyone else.”

For Mead, this game is analogous to the social game, and it’s through playing it that children learn what’s expected of them, the social role they and others must fulfill. They come to understand how rule-based systems work, and extrapolate that knowledge for common life. These common rules give rise to a “generalized other.” In a game like hide-and-seek or basketball, this would be the ensemble of all roles with their associated rules. This works the same way when applied to society in general: we all must learn the ensemble of social roles, what they’re allowed to do and what’s expected of them. For Mead, it’s through this process of differentiation that we can come to understand who we are, build a “me,” an identity, that allows us to occupy a place in the social world. 

These reflections can be applied to videogames. Using Mead’s concepts of “play” and “game,” we can understand the difference between the free play we find in games like Minecraft, and the rules-structured game of, for example, Halo. In Minecraft, we can occupy any role we want: farmer, miner, builder; we can chance between roles freely, and we have no objective other than the goals we set for ourselves. In Halo, we occupy the role of a space marine with a clear mission, with enemies, and with specific weapons and interactions we can use to defeat them.

There are two interesting insights for videogames. The first one is that, when we play a videogame, we stop being ourselves to occupy, temporarily, a different role. We could term this “suspension of identity,” in analogy with the notion of suspension of disbelief. For a limited time, we become another person. The usual social rules don’t apply to us, we move in a world entirely defined by game mechanics. Whether it’s free play or rules-based, we occupy different roles during the game. That has many implications for self-exploration and growth, that can’t be found in any other art form. When we watch a movie, we can empathize with characters different from us, but we never are those characters. In a videogame we, in some way, become the characters we play, we live their experiences as ours. We don’t say “my character destroyed an alien spaceship with a rocket launcher,” but rather “I destroyed an alien spaceship.”

The second insight is a consequence of the first one, and it’s the potential of videogames to put us in other people’s shoes, to make us go though part of their experiences. I’m thinking of games like This War of Mine, where we play as a group of civilians in a war zone, or Papers, Please!, where we play as a border agent in an authoritarian state. If, like Mead argues, game is the way in which we build our social identity and come to understand the roles that we all occupy, these kind of games can expand our “generalized other,” allowing us to move beyond the stereotypes that we internalize in childhood, and show us part of the reality in other people’s experiences. This potential is present in all art forms, but it’s strongest in videogames. Since we are forced to live these roles, we connect to them in a more profound way. That can force us to reinterpret how we see others, how the roles we assign them differ from reality, and, perhaps, how our identity and the role we ourselves adopt is more malleable than we think.

Note: All citations are from Mead, George H. “Play, the Game, and the Generalized Other” in Pragmatism and Classical American Philosophy: Essential Readings and Interpretive Essays, edited by John J. Stuhr, 581-589. New York, New York : Oxford University Press, 2000.
