# Management Frameworks and Military Systems

There’s an interesting analogy between the parallel evolution of management frameworks and military doctrine towards increased autonomy and flexibility, decentralizing decision-making. In project management, these are called “agile” frameworks. Instead of top-down, inflexible systems like Gantt graphs, which specify the timeframe for each task from the outset, they rely on small teams with autonomy to decide their own goals in short-term “sprints.” One example is the Scrum framework.

In his [blog](https://acoup.blog/2020/03/20/collections-why-dont-we-use-chemical-weapons-anymore/), historian Bret Devereaux explains the difference between two types of military system, following Stephen Biddle’s ‘Modern System’ and what he calls ‘Static System.’ The difference between the two systems is one of doctrine, of command and organization, not of equipment. The Modern System relies on a decentralized command structure, where junior officers have a lot of agency to make local decisions. So, small combined-arms units can be very mobile, avoiding artillery and exploiting enemy weaknesses. Modern armies rely on speed and surprise, overwhelming the enemy’s capacity. In contrast, in the Static System decisions come from the top of the chain of command, as soldiers and officers lack the training and equipment to operate independently. Thus, the mode of warfare is positional: trenches and sieges, fighting for every meter of terrain gained.

When comparing the two, Devereaux remarks that the modern system is far more effective, crushing static system armies with overwhelming casualties. He cites the Iraq war, where the ratio of Iraqi to coalition casualties was 100 to 1. However, the modern system is more expensive and harder to implement. It requires a lot of training, especially for officers, and decentralizing authority. That is very hard to do, especially for authoritarian regimes, which end up with weaker militaries.

The analogy is clear: top-down systems are easier to implement, but less effective. However, in order to switch to agile frameworks, the employees must have the autonomy and motivation to work effectively. Hoarding power in management positions and undermining the morale of employees with poor conditions leaves them unable to work effectively in small teams. Thus, to increase effectiveness and efficiency, a company should become more open and democratic, and put more power on the hands of employees. 

It’s unfortunate that the videogame industry often treats their workers as expendable products, enforcing unreasonable hours and laying off large parts of their teams to increase short-term profitability. As Devereaux remarks, “you cannot buy the modern system, you must train it.” The same is true for agile systems: experienced and effective teams take years to build up, but they can be destroyed in an instant.
